# Use this file to redirect pages when coming from older releases

# Server manual
docs/user_manual/working_with_ogc/ogc_server_support.rst docs/server_manual/index.rst
docs/user_manual/working_with_ogc/server/containerized_deployment.rst docs/server_manual/containerized_deployment.rst
docs/user_manual/working_with_ogc/server/development_server.rst docs/server_manual/development_server.rst
docs/user_manual/working_with_ogc/server/getting_started.rst docs/server_manual/getting_started.rst
docs/user_manual/working_with_ogc/server/index.rst docs/server_manual/index.rst
docs/user_manual/working_with_ogc/server/plugins.rst docs/server_manual/plugins.rst
docs/user_manual/working_with_ogc/server/services.rst docs/server_manual/services.rst

# Training manual
docs/training_manual/answers/answers.rst docs/training_manual/index.rst
docs/training_manual/basic_map/vector_data.rst docs/training_manual/basic_map/preparation.rst
docs/training_manual/forestry/stands_digitazing.rst docs/training_manual/forestry/stands_digitizing.rst
docs/training_manual/foreword/preparing_data.rst docs/training_manual/appendix/preparing_data.rst
docs/training_manual/introduction/index.rst docs/training_manual/foreword/index.rst
docs/training_manual/introduction/intro.rst docs/training_manual/foreword/intro.rst
docs/training_manual/introduction/overview.rst docs/training_manual/basic_map/overview.rst
docs/training_manual/introduction/preparation.rst docs/training_manual/basic_map/preparation.rst

# User manual
docs/user_manual/appendices/appendices.rst docs/user_manual/appendices/index.rst
docs/user_manual/plugins/core_plugins.rst docs/user_manual/plugins/core_plugins/index.rst
docs/user_manual/plugins/core_plugins/plugins_georeferencer.rst docs/user_manual/working_with_raster/georeferencer.rst
docs/user_manual/plugins/plugins_db_manager.rst docs/user_manual/plugins/core_plugins/plugins_db_manager.rst
docs/user_manual/plugins/plugins_coordinate_capture.html.rst docs/user_manual/plugins/core_plugins/index.rst
docs/user_manual/plugins/plugins_dxf2shape_converter.rst docs/user_manual/plugins/core_plugins/index.rst
docs/user_manual/plugins/plugins_ftools.rst docs/user_manual/processing_algs/qgis/index.rst
docs/user_manual/plugins/plugins_gdaltools.rst docs/user_manual/processing_algs/gdal/index.rst
docs/user_manual/plugins/plugins_heatmap.rst docs/user_manual/processing_algs/qgis/interpolation.rst
docs/user_manual/plugins/plugins_interpolation.rst docs/user_manual/processing_algs/qgis/interpolation.rst
docs/user_manual/plugins/plugins_metasearch.rst docs/user_manual/plugins/core_plugins/plugins_metasearch.rst
docs/user_manual/plugins/plugins_offline_editing.rst docs/user_manual/plugins/core_plugins/plugins_offline_editing.rst
# docs/user_manual/plugins/plugins_oracle_raster.rst (no idea what this is about)
docs/user_manual/plugins/plugins_raster_terrain.rst docs/user_manual/processing_algs/qgis/rasterterrainanalysis.rst
docs/user_manual/plugins/plugins_road_graph.rst docs/user_manual/processing_algs/qgis/networkanalysis.rst
docs/user_manual/plugins/plugins_spatial_query.rst docs/user_manual/processing_algs/qgis/vectorselection.rst
docs/user_manual/plugins/plugins_spit.rst docs/user_manual/plugins/core_plugins/plugins_db_manager.rst
docs/user_manual/plugins/plugins_topology_checker.rst docs/user_manual/plugins/core_plugins/plugins_topology_checker.rst

docs/user_manual/preamble/whats_new.rst docs/user_manual/preamble/preamble.rst
docs/user_manual/processing_algs/qgis/qgis_algs_include.rst docs/user_manual/processing_algs/algs_include.rst
docs/user_manual/qgis_browser/qgis_browser.rst docs/user_manual/introduction/browser.rst
docs/user_manual/working_with_mesh/mesh_properties.rst docs/user_manual/working_with_mesh/mesh.rst
docs/user_manual/working_with_ogc/index.rst docs/user_manual/working_with_ogc/ogc_client_support.rst
docs/user_manual/working_with_vector/expression.rst docs/user_manual/expressions/expression.rst
docs/user_manual/working_with_vector/field_calculator.rst docs/user_manual/working_with_vector/attribute_table.rst
docs/user_manual/working_with_vector/functions_list.rst docs/user_manual/expressions/functions_list.rst
docs/user_manual/working_with_vector/query_builder.rst docs/user_manual/working_with_vector/vector_properties.rst
docs/user_manual/working_with_vector/style_library.rst docs/user_manual/style_library/index.rst
docs/user_manual/working_with_vector/supported_data.rst docs/user_manual/managing_data_source/opening_data.rst
docs/user_manual/working_with_vector/virtual_layers.rst docs/user_manual/managing_data_source/create_layers.rst
docs/user_manual/working_with_vector_tiles/vector_tiles_properties.rst docs/user_manual/working_with_vector_tiles/vector_tiles.rst


## Print Layout
docs/user_manual/print_composer/composer_items/composer_attribute_table.rst docs/user_manual/print_composer/composer_items/composer_tables.rst
docs/user_manual/print_composer/composer_items/composer_items_shape.rst docs/user_manual/print_composer/composer_items/composer_shapes.rst
docs/user_manual/print_composer/print_composer.rst docs/user_manual/print_composer/index.rst

## Processing algorithm
docs/user_manual/processing_algs/qgis/graphics.rst docs/user_manual/processing_algs/qgis/plots.rst
