|updatedisclaimer|

.. _`label_helpsupport`:

****************
Help and Support
****************

Mailing lists 
=============

|qg| is under active development and as such it won't always work like
you expect it to. The preferred way to get help is by joining the
qgis-users mailing list. Your questions will reach a broader audience
and answers will benefit others.

qgis-users 
----------

This mailing list is used for discussion of |qg| in general, as well
as specific questions regarding its installation and use. You can
subscribe to the qgis-users mailing list by visiting the following
URL: http://lists.osgeo.org/mailman/listinfo/qgis-user

fossgis-talk-liste 
------------------

For the German-speaking audience, the German FOSSGIS e.V. provides the
fossgis-talk-liste mailing list. This mailing list is used for
discussion of open-source GIS in general, including |qg|. You can
subscribe to the fossgis-talk-liste mailing list by visiting the
following URL:
https://lists.fossgis.de/mailman/listinfo/fossgis-talk-liste

qgis-developer 
--------------

If you are a developer facing problems of a more technical nature, you
may want to join the qgis-developer mailing list here:
http://lists.osgeo.org/mailman/listinfo/qgis-developer

qgis-commit 
-----------

Each time a commit is made to the |qg| code repository, an email is
posted to this list. If you want to be up-to-date with every change to
the current code base, you can subscribe to this list at:
http://lists.osgeo.org/mailman/listinfo/qgis-commit

qgis-trac 
---------

This list provides email notification related to project management,
including bug reports, tasks, and feature requests. You can subscribe
to this list at: http://lists.osgeo.org/mailman/listinfo/qgis-trac

qgis-community-team 
-------------------

This list deals with topics like documentation, context help, user
guide, web sites, blog, mailing lists, forums, and translation
efforts. If you would like to work on the user guide as well, this
list is a good starting point to ask your questions. You can subscribe
to this list at:
http://lists.osgeo.org/mailman/listinfo/qgis-community-team

qgis-release-team 
-----------------

This list deals with topics like the release process, packaging
binaries for various OSs and announcing new releases to the world at
large. You can subscribe to this list at:
http://lists.osgeo.org/mailman/listinfo/qgis-release-team

qgis-tr 
-------

This list deals with the translation efforts. If you like to work on
the translation of the manuals or the graphical user interface (GUI),
this list is a good starting point to ask your questions. You can
subscribe to this list at:
http://lists.osgeo.org/mailman/listinfo/qgis-tr

qgis-edu 
--------

This list deals with |qg| education efforts. If you would like to work
on QGIS education materials, this list is a good starting point to ask
your questions. You can subscribe to this list at:
http://lists.osgeo.org/mailman/listinfo/qgis-edu

qgis-psc 
--------

This list is used to discuss Steering Committee issues related to
overall management and direction of |qg|. You can subscribe to this
list at: http://lists.osgeo.org/mailman/listinfo/qgis-psc

You are welcome to subscribe to any of the lists. Please remember to
contribute to the list by answering questions and sharing your
experiences.  Note that the qgis-commit and qgis-trac lists are
designed for notification only and are not meant for user postings.

IRC 
===

We also maintain a presence on IRC - visit us by joining the #qgis
channel on irc.freenode.net. Please wait for a response to your
question, as many folks on the channel are doing other things and it
may take a while for them to notice your question. If you missed a
discussion on IRC, not a problem! We log all discussion, so you can
easily catch up. Just go to http://qgis.org/irclogs and read the
IRC-logs.

Commercial support for QGIS is also available. Check the website
http://qgis.org/en/commercial-support.html for more information.

BugTracker 
==========

While the qgis-users mailing list is useful for general 'How do I do
XYZ in QGIS?'-type questions, you may wish to notify us about bugs in
QGIS.  You can submit bug reports using the QGIS bug tracker at
http://hub.qgis.org/projects/quantum-gis/issues. When creating a new
ticket for a bug, please provide an email address where we can contact
you for additional information.

Please bear in mind that your bug may not always enjoy the priority
you might hope for (depending on its severity). Some bugs may require
significant developer effort to remedy, and the manpower is not always
available for this.

Feature requests can be submitted as well using the same ticket system
as for bugs. Please make sure to select the type ``Feature``.

If you have found a bug and fixed it yourself, you can submit this
patch also. Again, the lovely redmine ticketsystem at
http://hub.qgis.org/wiki/quantum-gis/issues has this type as well.
Check the ``Patch supplied`` checkbox and attach your patch before
submitting your bug. One of the developers will review it and apply it
to |qg|. Please don't be alarmed if your patch is not applied straight
away -- developers may be tied up with other commitments.

Blog 
====

The |qg| community also runs a weblog at
http://planet.qgis.org/planet/, which has some interesting articles
for users and developers as well provided by other blogs in the
community. You are invited to contribute your own QGIS blog!

Plugins 
=======

The website http://plugins.qgis.org provides the official |qg| plugins
web portal. Here, you find a list of all stable and experimental QGIS
plugins available via the 'Official |qg| Plugin Repository'.

Wiki 
====

Lastly, we maintain a WIKI web site at
http://hub.qgis.org/projects/quantum-gis/wiki where you can find a
variety of useful information relating to QGIS development, release
plans, links to download sites, message-translation hints and
more. Check it out, there are some goodies inside!

